doc: Add Clang/LLVM based coverage report generation (#31933)
bitcoin/bitcoin: doc/developer-notes.md

> 

Reviewer: I just realized the PR description shouldn't contain the @-symbol. See:

https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/blob/3c1f72a36700271c7c1293383549c3be29f28edb/CONTRIBUTING.md?plain=1#L170-L174

Author: Removed the @ symbol

cmake -DJOBS=$(nproc) -P build/Coverage.cmake
```

> #### Using LLVM/Clang tooling

Reviewer: nit: Could use more frequently used term:
```suggestion
#### Using LLVM/Clang toolchain
```

Default LLVM/Clang tooling can be used to generate coverage report for unit tests.

Configure the build with the following flags:

> ```shell
> cmake -B build -DCMAKE_C_COMPILER="clang" \
>    -DCMAKE_CXX_COMPILER="clang++" \
>    -DCMAKE_C_FLAGS="-fprofile-instr-generate -fcoverage-mapping" \
>    -DCMAKE_CXX_FLAGS="-fprofile-instr-generate -fcoverage-mapping"
>   # for MacOS users , replace -DCMAKE_CXX_COMPILER="clang++" with -DCMAKE_CXX_COMPILER="$(brew --prefix llvm)/bin/clang++" and -DCMAKE_C_COMPILER="clang" with -DCMAKE_C_COMPILER="$(brew --prefix llvm)/bin/clang"
> cmake --build build # Use "-j N" here for N parallel jobs.
> ```

Reviewer: No sure about the random 2-space indentation, also prefer comments preceding the command they're about.
````suggestion
```shell
# MacOS may require -DCMAKE_CXX_COMPILER="$(brew --prefix llvm)/bin/clang++" and -DCMAKE_C_COMPILER="$(brew --prefix llvm)/bin/clang"
cmake -B build -DCMAKE_C_COMPILER="clang" \
   -DCMAKE_CXX_COMPILER="clang++" \
   -DCMAKE_C_FLAGS="-fprofile-instr-generate -fcoverage-mapping" \
   -DCMAKE_CXX_FLAGS="-fprofile-instr-generate -fcoverage-mapping"
cmake --build build # Use "-j N" here for N parallel jobs.
```
````

Generating the raw profile data based on `ctest` execution:

```shell
LLVM_PROFILE_FILE="default_%p.profraw" ctest --test-dir build # Use "-j N" here for N parallel jobs.

# merge all the raw profile data into a single file
find build -name "default_*.profraw" | xargs llvm-profdata merge -sparse -o build/coverage.profdata
```

Generating the coverage report:

```shell
llvm-cov show build/src/test/test_bitcoin \
    --instr-profile=build/coverage.profdata \
    --format=html \
    --show-instantiation-summary \
    --show-line-counts-or-regions \
    --show-expansions \
    --output-dir=build/coverage_report \
    --project-title="Bitcoin Core Coverage Report"
```

> The coverage report will be generated in the `coverage_report` directory inside the `build` directory.

Reviewer: nit: A bit verbose to repeat "directory", more helpful to include *index.html*?
```suggestion
The generated coverage report can be accessed at `build/coverage_report/index.html`.
```

cmake -DJOBS=$(nproc) -P build/Coverage.cmake
```

#### Using LLVM/Clang tooling

> Default LLVM/Clang tooling can be used to generate coverage report for unit and functional tests.

Author: updated.

Configure the build with the following flags:

```shell
cmake -B build -DCMAKE_C_COMPILER="clang" \
   -DCMAKE_CXX_COMPILER="clang++" \
   -DCMAKE_C_FLAGS="-fprofile-instr-generate -fcoverage-mapping" \
   -DCMAKE_CXX_FLAGS="-fprofile-instr-generate -fcoverage-mapping"

cmake --build build # Use "-j N" here for N parallel jobs.
```

Generating the raw profile data based on `ctest` execution:

```shell
cd build
export LLVM_PROFILE_FILE="default_%p.profraw"
ctest # Use "-j N" here for N parallel jobs.

# merge all the raw profile data into a single file
find . -name "default_*.profraw" | xargs llvm-profdata merge -sparse -o coverage.profdata
```

Generating the coverage report:

```shell
llvm-cov show ./src/test/test_bitcoin \
    --instr-profile=coverage.profdata \
    --format=html \
    --show-instantiation-summary \
    --show-line-counts-or-regions \
    --show-expansions \
    --output-dir=coverage_report \
    --project-title="Bitcoin Core Coverage Report"
```

The coverage report will be generated in the `coverage_report` directory inside the `build` directory.

> ### Performance profiling with perf

Author: added the newline

cmake -DJOBS=$(nproc) -P build/Coverage.cmake
```

#### Using LLVM/Clang tooling

> Default LLVM/Clang tooling can be used to generate coverage report for unit tests.

Reviewer: I see. According to *doc/dependencies.md*, one only needs to have one of the compilers installed. I think it's clearer to remove the "Default" qualifier and needless to repeat the name of the toolchain.
```suggestion
The following generates a coverage report for unit tests.
```

Configure the build with the following flags:

```shell
cmake -B build -DCMAKE_C_COMPILER="clang" \
   -DCMAKE_CXX_COMPILER="clang++" \
   -DCMAKE_C_FLAGS="-fprofile-instr-generate -fcoverage-mapping" \
   -DCMAKE_CXX_FLAGS="-fprofile-instr-generate -fcoverage-mapping"

cmake --build build # Use "-j N" here for N parallel jobs.
```

Generating the raw profile data based on `ctest` execution:

```shell
cd build
export LLVM_PROFILE_FILE="default_%p.profraw"
ctest # Use "-j N" here for N parallel jobs.

# merge all the raw profile data into a single file
find . -name "default_*.profraw" | xargs llvm-profdata merge -sparse -o coverage.profdata
```

Generating the coverage report:

```shell
llvm-cov show ./src/test/test_bitcoin \
    --instr-profile=coverage.profdata \
    --format=html \
    --show-instantiation-summary \
    --show-line-counts-or-regions \
    --show-expansions \
    --output-dir=coverage_report \

>     --project-title="Bitcoin Core Coverage Report"

Reviewer 2: Following these instructions, this command failed for me with

`error: coverage.profdata: could not read profile data!No such file or directory`.

I then ran `rm -rf ./build/` and re-ran the instructions. Now seeing:

`warning: 2 functions have mismatched data`.

Haven't looked further yet.

I usually build with both `rm -rf ./build/` and `-DCMAKE_C_COMPILER="$(brew --prefix llvm)/bin/clang" -DCMAKE_CXX_COMPILER="$(brew --prefix llvm)/bin/clang++"`, among other flags, so I may need to try that.

Author: The first error never occurs if I always remove my `build` folder and then proceeding with the commands specified. 

For MacOs , I have llvm 19 which is also a known [issue](https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/issues/31049) so I generally have to specify my commands with this to use llvm 18.

```
cmake -B build \
   -DCMAKE_C_COMPILER="$(brew --prefix llvm@18)/bin/clang" \
   -DCMAKE_CXX_COMPILER="$(brew --prefix llvm@18)/bin/clang++" \
   -DCMAKE_C_FLAGS="-fprofile-instr-generate -fcoverage-mapping" \
   -DCMAKE_CXX_FLAGS="-fprofile-instr-generate -fcoverage-mapping" \
   -DAPPEND_LDFLAGS="-Wl,-no_warn_duplicate_libraries" \
```
and also replace
`llvm-profdata` with `/opt/homebrew/opt/llvm@18/bin/llvm-profdata` and `llvm-cov` with `/opt/homebrew/opt/llvm@18/bin/llvm-cov`

I do get the warning . The warning can be because of many reasons like Link-Time Optimisations , multiple defined compilations units etc. which results in different profile data. Its harmless and can be ignored.

Reviewer 3: > Its harmless and can be ignored.

I got it in both Ubuntu and macOS. Perhaps we can document it as well to avoid confusion?

```
$ find build -name "default_*.profraw" | xargs llvm-profdata merge -sparse -o build/coverage.profdata
build/src/univalue/default_44199.profraw: main: function basic block count change detected (counter mismatch)
Make sure that all profile data to be merged is generated from the same binary.
$ ll build/coverage.profdata
... 15926688 feb 27 09:44 build/coverage.profdata
$ llvm-cov show build/src/test/test_bitcoin \
    --instr-profile=build/coverage.profdata \
    --format=html \
    --show-instantiation-summary \
    --show-line-counts-or-regions \
    --show-expansions \
    --output-dir=build/coverage_report \
    --project-title="Bitcoin Core Coverage Report"
warning: 2 functions have mismatched data
```

Author: > I got it in both Ubuntu and macOS. Perhaps we can document it as well to avoid confusion?
> 
> ```
> $ find build -name "default_*.profraw" | xargs llvm-profdata merge -sparse -o build/coverage.profdata
> build/src/univalue/default_44199.profraw: main: function basic block count change detected (counter mismatch)
> Make sure that all profile data to be merged is generated from the same binary.
> ```

Have you tried building with clang 19 ? I dont get this on MacOs
```
╰─ find build -name "default_*.profraw" | xargs llvm-profdata merge -sparse -o build/coverage.profdata

╭────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────── ✔ 21:32:24 
 llvm-cov show build/src/test/test_bitcoin \                                                 
    --instr-profile=build/coverage.profdata \
    --format=html \
    --show-instantiation-summary \
    --show-line-counts-or-regions \
    --show-expansions \
    --output-dir=build/coverage_report \
    --project-title="Bitcoin Core Coverage Report"
warning: 2 functions have mismatched data
```

Reviewer 3: Ok, I had 18.1.8, updated it to 19, rerun the merge and I can confirm that the "counter mismatch" has gone. nit: Please consider adding a note there regarding the message and the warning with the 2 functions mismatch, any of those didn't affect the generation of the report nor its visualisation. Thanks!

Author: Added the notes under the commands.

cmake -DJOBS=$(nproc) -P build/Coverage.cmake
```

> 

Reviewer: nit: Could shorten PR title. (Doesn't invalidate ACKs).
```diff
-doc: Update documentation to include Clang/llvm based coverage report generation
+doc: Add Clang/LLVM based coverage report generation
```

#### Using LLVM/Clang toolchain

The following generates a coverage report for unit tests.

Configure the build with the following flags:

```shell
# MacOS may require -DCMAKE_CXX_COMPILER="$(brew --prefix llvm)/bin/clang++" and -DCMAKE_C_COMPILER="$(brew --prefix llvm)/bin/clang"
cmake -B build -DCMAKE_C_COMPILER="clang" \
   -DCMAKE_CXX_COMPILER="clang++" \
   -DCMAKE_C_FLAGS="-fprofile-instr-generate -fcoverage-mapping" \

>    -DCMAKE_CXX_FLAGS="-fprofile-instr-generate -fcoverage-mapping"

Reviewer 4: @ldionne, do you know if `-O2` could have any adverse effects on coverage created with clang's `-fprofile-instr-generate -fcoverage-mapping`?

>    -DCMAKE_CXX_FLAGS="-fprofile-instr-generate -fcoverage-mapping"

Reviewer 5: Sadly, I am not very familiar with how code coverage works in Clang (or other compilers), so I am not the best person to answer that question. However, as a general rule of thumb, I would encourage you to go with what the documentation says, and if you then notice shortcomings, report those as bugs against the project.

>    -DCMAKE_CXX_FLAGS="-fprofile-instr-generate -fcoverage-mapping"

Reviewer 4: The docs at https://clang.llvm.org/docs/SourceBasedCodeCoverage.html don't mention anything about `-O` flags.

>    -DCMAKE_CXX_FLAGS="-fprofile-instr-generate -fcoverage-mapping"

Reviewer 4: I don't see how from "source-based ... operates on AST and preprocessor information" follows that `-O` don't matter.

I did coverage reports locally with `Debug` (`-O0`) and `Release` (`-O2`) and compared them. They are slightly different, which could be due to non-determinism in the tests. `src/sync.cpp` is completely missing from the `-O2` report.

Time to complete the tests:

test | Debug | Release
--- | --- | ---
unit | 60s | 31s
functional | 186s | 76s

>    -DCMAKE_CXX_FLAGS="-fprofile-instr-generate -fcoverage-mapping"

Reviewer 5: The `-O` flag controls optimization level, which shouldn't have any impact on the AST representation of the code. The compiler builds an AST representation of the code that corresponds to the semantics of the program, and from that generates LLVM IR that implements those semantics. This is then passed on to the optimizer, which performs transformations on the LLVM IR representation (not the AST directly) to produce equivalent but more efficient LLVM IR.

This is much simplified, but if code coverage is implemented based on the AST representation, then I do agree that `-O` flags shouldn't matter. That being said, I have a hard time imagining how each line in the final IR can always be attributed to the correct line in the original sources in the presence of optimizations like inlining and especially outlining, where the same executable code may be used to implement source-different functions. But if the documentation says it, I would go with that.

>    -DCMAKE_CXX_FLAGS="-fprofile-instr-generate -fcoverage-mapping"

Reviewer 4: @ldionne, that is very useful. Thanks for the clarification! With my limited knowledge I was thinking that maybe AST is generated after optimization.

Just to clarify on this particular issue - I am fine with whatever `CMAKE_BUILD_TYPE=` or omitting it and leaving the default. This is only a documentation after all. People can tweak the commands as they wish before executing them.

cmake --build build # Use "-j N" here for N parallel jobs.
```

Generating the raw profile data based on `ctest` execution:

```shell
LLVM_PROFILE_FILE="default_%p.profraw" ctest --test-dir build # Use "-j N" here for N parallel jobs.

> 

Reviewer 4: I would suggest collecting coverage from functional tests as well because that would change a bit the arguments of `llvm-cov` (see later) and because the path to the profile file has to be specified as an absolute path which is not obvious:

```md
Generating the raw profile data based on `ctest` execution:

```shell
LLVM_PROFILE_FILE=$(pwd)/build/raw_profile_data/%m_%p.profraw build/test/functional/test_runner.py
`` `
```
it has to be a full path because otherwise the `.profraw` file will be created inside the temporary directory, like `/tmp/test_runner_₿_🏃_20250304_134152/...` and will be removed when the temporary directory is deleted at the end of the tests.

# merge all the raw profile data into a single file

> find build -name "default_*.profraw" | xargs llvm-profdata merge -sparse -o build/coverage.profdata

Reviewer: Thread https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/pull/31933#discussion_r1979323892:

With `-sparse`:
```
warning: 16 functions have mismatched data
```
Without `-sparse` (current version of PR):
```
warning: 65 functions have mismatched data
```

# Note: The "counter mismatch" warning can be safely ignored, though it can be resolved by updating to Clang 19.
# The warning occurs due to version mismatches but doesn't affect the coverage report generation.
```

> 

Reviewer 6: Small nit, creating a blockquote note remark section is maybe more fitting:

> Note: The "counter mismatch" warning can be safely ignored, though it can be resolved by updating to Clang 19.\
> The warning occurs due to version mismatches but doesn't affect the coverage report generation.

Generating the coverage report:

```shell
llvm-cov show build/src/test/test_bitcoin \

>     --instr-profile=build/coverage.profdata \

Reviewer 4: Locally, I have been using this as well:

```
-ignore-filename-regex="src/crc32c/|src/leveldb/|src/minisketch/|src/secp256k1/|src/test/"
```

    --format=html \
    --show-instantiation-summary \
    --show-line-counts-or-regions \
    --show-expansions \
    --output-dir=build/coverage_report \

>     --project-title="Bitcoin Core Coverage Report"

Reviewer 4: If there are profile files from more than one executable, like from `test_bitcoin` and from `bitcoind` then the syntax of this changes a little bit: drop `build/src/test/test_bitcoin` and add `-object=build/src/test/test_bitcoin -object=build/src/bitcoind`:

```
llvm-cov show 
    --object=build/src/test/test_bitcoin \
    --object=build/src/bitcoind \
    --instr-profile=build/coverage.profdata \
    --format=html \
    --show-instantiation-summary \
    --show-line-counts-or-regions \
    --show-expansions \
    --output-dir=build/coverage_report \
    --project-title="Bitcoin Core Coverage Report"
```

cmake -DJOBS=$(nproc) -P build/Coverage.cmake
```

#### Using LLVM/Clang toolchain

The following generates a coverage report for unit tests and functional tests.

> Configure the build with the following flags:

Reviewer 2: Should we mention clearing out with `rm -rf build` to begin with a clean slate?

```shell

> # MacOS may require -DCMAKE_CXX_COMPILER="$(brew --prefix llvm)/bin/clang++" and -DCMAKE_C_COMPILER="$(brew --prefix llvm)/bin/clang"

Author: Added , although I prefer it being before the commands then after it.

> # MacOS may require -DCMAKE_CXX_COMPILER="$(brew --prefix llvm)/bin/clang++" and -DCMAKE_C_COMPILER="$(brew --prefix llvm)/bin/clang"

Reviewer: Thread https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/pull/31933#discussion_r1999092770:

nit: Would prefer not repeating the text below, and think mentioning brew is overly verbose, adding "instead" is sufficient IMO:
```
# MacOS may instead require `-DCMAKE_C_COMPILER="$(brew --prefix llvm)/bin/clang" -DCMAKE_CXX_COMPILER="$(brew --prefix llvm)/bin/clang++"`
```

> cmake -B build -DCMAKE_BUILD_TYPE=Debug -DCMAKE_C_COMPILER="clang" \

Reviewer 2: Directory name: would it make sense to replace the `build` directory in the instructions with, say, `build_cov` instead?

I think we're already using directory naming like `build_fuzz` (in `doc/fuzzing.md`) and `build_dev_mode` (in `CMakePresets.json`).

Author: Decided against it since the previous docs built the coverage in `build` directory .

   -DCMAKE_CXX_COMPILER="clang++" \

>    -DAPPEND_CFLAGS="-fprofile-instr-generate -fcoverage-mapping" \
>    -DAPPEND_CXXFLAGS="-fprofile-instr-generate -fcoverage-mapping" \

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
   -DAPPEND_CFLAGS="-fprofile-instr-generate -fcoverage-mapping -g" \
   -DAPPEND_CXXFLAGS="-fprofile-instr-generate -fcoverage-mapping -g" \
```
NIT: In Debug builds, the compiler usually disables optimizations, but without explicit -g, some optimizations might still occur. Given that the code coverage results are indeed different when running without `-g` and with `-g`, I would say some optimization still occurs interfering with the code coverage results.

Reviewer 6: > `-DCMAKE_BUILD_TYPE=Debug` adds `-g` already.

Why is there a difference in the reports when manually adding the -g ?

Reviewer 6: The extra `-g` just gives a lot of `Unexecuted instantiation:` messages and a lot lower coverage. No sure why but don't think this gives a good image of the actual coverage.

   -DAPPEND_LDFLAGS="-fprofile-instr-generate -fcoverage-mapping"
cmake --build build # Use "-j N" here for N parallel jobs.
```

> Generating the raw profile data based on `ctest` execution:

Reviewer 3: small nit:
```suggestion
Generating the raw profile data based on `ctest` and functional tests execution:
```
Or remove both and clarify it below before each execution (or any alternative you might have).

```shell
# Create directory for raw profile data
mkdir -p $(pwd)/build/raw_profile_data

# Run tests to generate profiles
LLVM_PROFILE_FILE="$(pwd)/build/raw_profile_data/%m_%p.profraw" ctest --test-dir build # Use "-j N" here for N parallel jobs.

> LLVM_PROFILE_FILE="$(pwd)/build/raw_profile_data/%m_%p.profraw" build/test/functional/test_runner.py

Reviewer 4: nit: `test_runner.py` also supports `-j N` for parallel jobs.

# merge all the raw profile data into a single file
find build -name "*.profraw" | xargs llvm-profdata merge -o build/coverage.profdata
```

> **Note:** The "counter mismatch" warning can be safely ignored, though it can be resolved by updating to Clang 19.
> The warning occurs due to version mismatches but doesn't affect the coverage report generation.

Generating the coverage report:

```shell
llvm-cov show \

>     --object=build/src/test/test_bitcoin \
>     --object=build/src/bitcoind \

Reviewer 4: After https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/pull/31161 the binaries are now in `bin/`:

```suggestion
    --object=build/bin/test_bitcoin \
    --object=build/bin/bitcoind \
```

>     --object=build/bin/test_bitcoin \

Reviewer 4: I forgot to mention one more option that is useful here: `-Xdemangler=llvm-cxxfilt`. Without that option I get:
```
Unexecuted instantiation: addrman_tests.cpp:_ZL17LogAcceptCategoryN5BCLog8LogFlagsENS_5LevelE
```
and with that option:
```
Unexecuted instantiation: addrman_tests.cpp:LogAcceptCategory(BCLog::LogFlags, BCLog::Level)
```

    --instr-profile=build/coverage.profdata \
    --ignore-filename-regex="src/crc32c/|src/leveldb/|src/minisketch/|src/secp256k1/|src/test/" \
    --format=html \
    --show-instantiation-summary \
    --show-line-counts-or-regions \
    --show-expansions \
    --output-dir=build/coverage_report \
    --project-title="Bitcoin Core Coverage Report"
```

> **Note:** The "functions have mismatched data" warning can be safely ignored, the coverage report will still be generated correctly despite this warning.
> This warning occurs due to profdata mismatch created during the merge process for shared libraries.

> The generated coverage report can be accessed at `build/coverage_report/index.html`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The generated coverage report is located at `build/coverage_report/index.html`. Running `open build/coverage_report/index.html` will open it in your browser.
```

Reviewer: Thread https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/pull/31933#discussion_r1999113012:

`open` is MacOS-specific AFAIK. I don't have it on my Linux install. Also overly repetitive/verbose IMO.

cmake -DJOBS=$(nproc) -P build/Coverage.cmake
```

#### Using LLVM/Clang toolchain

The following generates a coverage report for unit tests and functional tests.

Configure the build with the following flags:

> > Consider building with a clean state using `rm -rf build`

Reviewer 7: We don't do this in any other docs, and as far as I'm aware, this being needed would be a bug, not sure it should be here.

Reviewer 7: > but if it is important to remove, it could be done in a follow-up.

The more I look at this, the less clear it seems to be. Clearly the dir reuse can/is causing issues, however the discussion in #31942 also claims that any need to nuke a build dir is a bug. If we are going to start adding this, we should at least be consistent, and add this same disclaimer to every bit of documentation that invokes cmake. Will followup in #31942.

   -DAPPEND_CFLAGS="-fprofile-instr-generate -fcoverage-mapping" \
   -DAPPEND_CXXFLAGS="-fprofile-instr-generate -fcoverage-mapping" \
   -DAPPEND_LDFLAGS="-fprofile-instr-generate -fcoverage-mapping"
cmake --build build # Use "-j N" here for N parallel jobs.
```

Generating the raw profile data based on `ctest` and functional tests execution:

```shell
# Create directory for raw profile data
mkdir -p build/raw_profile_data

# Run tests to generate profiles
LLVM_PROFILE_FILE="$(pwd)/build/raw_profile_data/%m_%p.profraw" ctest --test-dir build # Use "-j N" here for N parallel jobs.
LLVM_PROFILE_FILE="$(pwd)/build/raw_profile_data/%m_%p.profraw" build/test/functional/test_runner.py # Use "-j N" here for N parallel jobs

# Merge all the raw profile data into a single file
find build/raw_profile_data -name "*.profraw" | xargs llvm-profdata merge -o build/coverage.profdata
```

> **Note:** The "counter mismatch" warning can be safely ignored, though it can be resolved by updating to Clang 19.
> The warning occurs due to version mismatches but doesn't affect the coverage report generation.

Generating the coverage report:

```shell
llvm-cov show \
    --object=build/bin/test_bitcoin \

>     --object=build/bin/bitcoind \

Author: There are also other binaries like `bitcoin-cli` , `bitcoin-tx` including `bitcoin-chainstate` which are built when using specific flags. Including each requires `--object={}` . Adding too many felt too verbose and not needed by a general reviewer. If required he/she may add it themselves.

cmake -DJOBS=$(nproc) -P build/Coverage.cmake
```

#### Using LLVM/Clang toolchain

The following generates a coverage report for unit tests and functional tests.

Configure the build with the following flags:

> Consider building with a clean state using `rm -rf build`

```shell
# MacOS may require `-DCMAKE_C_COMPILER="$(brew --prefix llvm)/bin/clang" -DCMAKE_CXX_COMPILER="$(brew --prefix llvm)/bin/clang++"` instead of `-DCMAKE_C_COMPILER="clang" -DCMAKE_CXX_COMPILER="clang++"` if the compiler was installed using brew.
cmake -B build -DCMAKE_C_COMPILER="clang" \
   -DCMAKE_CXX_COMPILER="clang++" \
   -DAPPEND_CFLAGS="-fprofile-instr-generate -fcoverage-mapping" \
   -DAPPEND_CXXFLAGS="-fprofile-instr-generate -fcoverage-mapping" \
   -DAPPEND_LDFLAGS="-fprofile-instr-generate -fcoverage-mapping"
cmake --build build # Use "-j N" here for N parallel jobs.
```

Generating the raw profile data based on `ctest` and functional tests execution:

```shell
# Create directory for raw profile data

> mkdir -p $(pwd)/build/raw_profile_data

Reviewer: `$(pwd)` is redundant for `mkdir`:
```suggestion
mkdir -p build/raw_profile_data
```

Author: done.

# Run tests to generate profiles
LLVM_PROFILE_FILE="$(pwd)/build/raw_profile_data/%m_%p.profraw" ctest --test-dir build # Use "-j N" here for N parallel jobs.
LLVM_PROFILE_FILE="$(pwd)/build/raw_profile_data/%m_%p.profraw" build/test/functional/test_runner.py # Use "-j N" here for N parallel jobs

> # merge all the raw profile data into a single file
> find build -name "*.profraw" | xargs llvm-profdata merge -o build/coverage.profdata

Reviewer: nit: Could be more precise, use leading Capital letter like other comments.
```suggestion
# Merge all the raw profile data into a single file
find build/raw_profile_data -name "*.profraw" | xargs llvm-profdata merge -o build/coverage.profdata
```
